NEO900.ORG WWW SITE README
==========================

The Neo900 website is generated by static site generator called Pelican.
In should be available in most distros as "pelican" or "python-pelican" package.

To launch development server with autorefresh:

    make start

It should now listen to port 8000. Analogically, "make stop" stops the server.

Directory tree:

  /content - news entries
  /content/pages - pages like "Donate", "Contact us", "Specs" etc.
  /content/ublog - microblog entries
  /theme/static - static files copied to output directory with no modifications
  /theme/templates - main page and templates for pages for stuff like news entries (some are unused)

  /output - the directory where Pelican outputs the page files. Usually shouldn't matter (dev server exposes it via HTTP,
            and the deploy script launches Pelican by itself), but may be handy when debugging.

For more details on how to write posts with Pelican, refer to http://docs.getpelican.com/en/3.6.0/content.html
Note that we're using HTML format everywhere, so while reStructuredText and Markdown would work as well, using HTML
is probably the best for consistency. However, remember that this HTML (especially <meta> tags) as in /content, /content/pages,
and /content/ublog directories is not the HTML that gets into the browser - <meta> tags will be parsed, and <body> tag wrapped with
the appropiate template to add stuff like header and footer.

You can make a "one shot" build to /output with:

    make
