Title:        Work begins as a new engineer comes in! Welcome metacollin!
Date:         2017-09-03
Category:     news
Author:       sn0wmonster
Slug:         neo900-update-2017-09-03
Tags:         team, layouts
body_params:  class="weekly news"

Kickin' it with KiCad and ballin' with metacollin! Work begins as a new
engineer comes in!
{: .lead :}


## New members

The road to layouts and manufacturing has taken some winding turns,
tested the team's resolve, and reminded us all of the gloomy state of
affairs for hardware openness in the industry.

Nevertheless, the Neo900 project has remained uncompromising in its
agenda to provide a completely open and transparent stack for all its
developers and users. Ultimately, this stance has caused us to take
pause when dealing with mainstream layout engineers and foundries who
would have Neo900 conform to their interests. This has ultimately led
the team to turn to Freenode for what it was intended for -- open source
collaboration -- and utlimately discover a new team member.

We welcome metacollin to the core team, an experienced electronic design
engineer, native KiCad expert and active contributor to the KiCad project.

metacollin's invaluable addition to the team not only makes v2 of the
Neo900 prototype more of a reality, but provides us the necessary KiCad
support when needed.

## Status of development

As metacollin settles in to his role of layout engineering, and managing
the production and assembly of the first run of the proto_v2 boards,
we'll have more technical updates to share.

The current expectation for v2 prototype layout completion is 5 weeks.

The whole Neo900 team thanks the community graciously for their much
needed patience as we continue to build and bring this project closer
to your palm.
